State sync engine design doc (#677)
onflow/flow: roadmap/state_sync_protocol/state-sync-protocol.md

# Execution State Synchronization Protocol

## Context

Today, Access nodes act as the gateway to the Flow network, providing a query endpoint for users (REST, gRPC) and performing important admission control duties such as:
* Rate limiting of requests (script executions, Collection requests, account queries, etc.)
* Basic validation, proving a first level of filtering to prevent bad transactions from entering the network

> Execution nodes and Collection nodes currently still expose public APIs, which are now mostly obsolete. Allowing users to bypass the Access layer and make direct requests to these nodes not only dilutes the valuable resources which should be reserved for performing tasks crucial to the protocol (especially in the case of Execution nodes), but it also leaves them at risk of denial-of-service attacks. Going forward, in order to protect the other staked nodes of the network, the Access layer will become the *only* way for users to interact with the network.

Author: > Going forward, in order to protect the other staked nodes of the network, the Access layer will become the *only* way for users to interact with the network.

After our latest meeting, are we still opposed to keeping this line?

Author: > Execution nodes and Collection nodes currently still expose public APIs, which are now mostly obsolete.

What I mean here is that the *public* APIs are obsolete, meaning there is no need for these APIs to be public since external parties / clients can interact via the Access Node. Suggestions on how to phrase this to make it more clear are welcome.

Reviewer: > Going forward, in order to protect the other staked nodes of the network, the Access layer will become the only way for users to interact with the network.

I think that this accurately represents the vision 👍

**Execution Data (individual)**

```console
smnzhu@mbp:~$ SORTED_BY_SIZE=$(gsutil du -h gs://flow_public_mainnet13_execution_state | sed -e 's/ MiB/M/g' -e 's/ KiB/K/g' | sort -h | sed -e 's/M/ MiB/g' -e 's/K/ KiB/g')
smnzhu@mbp:~$ echo $SORTED_BY_SIZE | head -n 1
3.57 KiB     gs://flow_public_mainnet13_execution_state/5d00b1ef2670d5987015c582727ab2308b19916ea4303ad56d600bb1fb4a12fc.cbor
smnzhu@mbp:~$ echo $SORTED_BY_SIZE | tail -n 1
377.18 MiB   gs://flow_public_mainnet13_execution_state/38db1ad86322fa81ff105328fd2812f2d5eed87ea4b7dba4e4095b1934fcec86.cbor
smnzhu@mbp:~$ echo $SORTED_BY_SIZE | awk '{ a[i++]=$0; } END { print a[int(i/2)]; }'
70.47 KiB    gs://flow_public_mainnet13_execution_state/4f6892c5b1b16e41ae1adda086b8aa241d254b780f44ceb5e45a5a1d5bb3d8aa.cbor
```

**Execution Data (~3 week spork)**

```console
smnzhu@mbp:~$ gsutil du -sh gs://flow_public_mainnet13_execution_state
446.14 GiB   gs://flow_public_mainnet13_execution_state
smnzhu@mbp:~$ gsutil ls gs://flow_public_mainnet13_execution_state | wc -l
  473590
```

**Execution State Index (~3 week spork)**

```console
simon_zhu_dapperlabs_com@observer-001 /var/flow/data/mainnet-13 $ sudo du -sh index
103G    index
```

> Based on the numbers above, we should require Access nodes to have >43GB of RAM (27GB + current 16GB requirement) and minimum 1.5-2TB of storage space for a 3 month spork. These requirements can likely be decreased if sharding is implemented (see [Future Optimizations](#future-optimizations)).

Reviewer: I'd suggest to re-frame this and instead of sharding, talk about horizontal scaling:

```suggestion
Based on the numbers above, we should require Access nodes to have >43GB of RAM (27GB + current 16GB requirement) and minimum 1.5-2TB of storage space for a 3 month spork. However, these requirements don't have to be met by a single machine, because the historic state does not change. The historic state can be easily distributed over many physical machines allowing for arbitrary horizontal scaling (see [Future Optimizations](#future-optimizations)).
```

## Future Optimizations

### Checkpointing

Having a checkpointing mechanism will allow new nodes to catch up more quickly, while also reducing the amount of data Access nodes need to store on disk.

> Access nodes can periodically (e.g. at every 10000th block) generate a snapshot of the full state index and store it in their blobstore. They can then prune all of the Execution Data for blocks older than the snapshot, and require nodes that are behind to directly sync the snapshot first before catching up via per-block Execution Data updates.

Reviewer: Node operators might want to keep the historic state; pruning might not be desirable 

```suggestion
Access nodes can periodically (e.g. at every 10000th block) generate a snapshot of the full state index and store it in their blobstore. Thereby, new access nodes (and other external clients) could directly sync starting from the most recent snapshot and catch up via per-block Execution Data updates (before they sync the full state history if they desire to do so).
```

The root CID of the snapshot must be shared with new nodes somehow so that they can use it to download the snapshot via Bitswap. There are a few ways this can be done:

* The CID can be shared on a broadcast channel using a *Byzantine consistent broadcast* algorithm<sup>[6](#footnotes)</sup>.
* A new Access node can randomly select a couple of other Access nodes and simply ask them for the CID. If the responses it receives are concordant, it can go ahead and download the data. Once the download is complete, it can generate the state trie for each block and compare its hash to the one found on-chain in the corresponding Execution Result. If it finds an inconsistency, it has all the evidence it needs to submit a slashing challenge against the nodes which provided it with the bad CID.

> ### Sharding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Horizontal scaling of historic state storage
```

The Execution Data can be sharded so that each Access node only needs to store and respond to requests for a fraction of the entire dataset.

There are many ways that sharding can be implemented. For example, consistent hashing can be used to determine the assignment of Execution Data to Access nodes, so that when nodes join or leave the network at each epoch, the Execution Data can be remapped according to the consistent hashing scheme. We should use the Random Beacon to determine each Access node's locations around the consistent hashing circle in order to prevent malicious Access nodes from purposely skewing the distribution.

> It remains a challenge to ensure that Access nodes keep Execution Data available instead of pruning it and ignoring Bitswap requests. *Data availability proofs* and *proofs of retrievability* may be helpful here:

Reviewer: Here, I would focus on the ability to horizontally scale the historic state storage within a single access node (instead of sharing across different access nodes)
